---
layout: post
title:  The Opening Keynote
date:   2015-03-03 09:24:20
categories:
speaker: Yehuda Katz and Tom Dale
---

Ember is growing: more apps, CLI users, addons, meetups/user groups.

#### What's new since 2014?:

* Rapid release cycle
* RFC process
* Features
  * HTMLBars (no more `bind-attr`!, block params, faster with less memory, etc)
  * Robust Ember Inspector
  * Ember CLI!!!!
  * Testing ecosystem, query params, Ember Data rethink

#### What's coming?:

* Versioned guides! <3 (adopting Ember CLI semantics)
* Engines: Encapsulate a piece of an application with namespacing, etc.
* List View: Improvements coming
* `<angle-bracket>`, async, routable components
* Ember 2.0: The plan is the feature.
* JSON API out of the box
* First class support for pagination and filtering

Ember 2.0 release date of June 12. Same for Ember Inspector, Ember CLI, ALL THE THINGS!!!

## Ember CLI FastBoot

Ember on the server :). This is great for mobile devices and older machines. An end user will
be able to see a particular page's content before the JS executes (or those NoScript users).

## Performance

React/Ember.js comparison. Yehuda and Tom agree, performance is something that needs to improve. React
leverages the VirtualDOM since the DOM is a performance bottleneck with DOM batching to avoid repaints, etc.

HTMLbars will take a slightly different approach. It will not track elements of the DOM that won't change,
like a wrapper div. The idea is that declarative syntax of Ember templating, Ember knows what parts will
and will not change. Thus allowing further optimization that React's imperative paradigm cannot.

DEMO: <https://dbmonster.firebaseapp.com>

This rendering engine will be called Glimmer.

<https://is-ember-fast-yet.firebaseapp.com/>

These additions will be compatible with current apps, allowing us to upgrade with ease <3.

# It's our antidote to hype fatigue!

#### How can we help?:

* Test beta apps
